This is chapter 16 of our series in relation to the race riots in Wales in
1919, June 1919. Chapter 16 is Cardiff riots. Black men in court that's
Afro-Caribbean, Arab mainly and African. This is part two of the Cardiff riots.
Black men found guilty in Swansea Court as a result of their role in the Cardiff
riots. Well despite 15 men being taken to court, some with very obvious injuries,
the court acted in a reasonable and fair way towards them. The press may have
placed all the blame on the black people of Butetown and Grangetown but the court
did not. The offences punished were largely unavoidable in terms of
punishment. They were mainly gun related in relation to violence towards the
police and shooting directly into the crowd. Black men found guilty were
Muhammad Ali, Ali Abdul, Ivor Gabriel Lansman and Muhammad Qayyid also known as
Ahmed Khalad. So only four men were found guilty. Others found not guilty or no
evidence presented were Ishmael Muhammad, Cham Ali, Sali Abdullah, Sayyid
bin Sayyid, Farah Muhammad, Muhammad Hassan, John Tucker, Muhammad Sharif, Issa
Muhammad, Muhammad Abederi and John Abdullah. So the four black men
who found guilty was sentenced to prison in Swansea Court. The four men were as I
say Ali Abdul who was age 26, a fireman on the merchant ships. He was given four
days imprisonment for assaulting Frederick Gregory, a police constable. I
should add he'd already been in prison for nearly seven weeks. Sub-waiting trial.
Ivor Gabriel Lansman was age 21, a ship's cook and he was given a three-year
prison sentence for shooting at Sydney Jones, William Clarke and James Coombs.
Ahmed Khalad known also as Muhammad Qayyid, age 25, a ship's donkeyman was
given 15 months hard labour for shooting at John Porter, a police constable.
Muhammad Ali, age 27, was given three months hard labour for shooting at Henry
Brotherton and Ernest May. Except for John Abdullah who is listed as a
shopkeeper but was also a boarding house owner, all of the black men were in the
merchant navy at the time of the riots and therefore it's extremely likely that
they were also involved in World War One. Now thanks to the Cardiff Story Museum
we know that a number of people were compensated for loss of goods and damage
during the riots. The bulk of those being in Butetown. Some of these were among the
men that appeared in court. The figures I'm going to quote show the actual amount
received and the modern equivalent in 2017 according to the National Archives
in London. Muhammad Ali, now he was found guilty in court and was sentenced three
months hard labour. Nonetheless he received 67 pounds 10 shillings
compensation, a modern equivalent of a thousand one thousand nine hundred and
sixty-one pounds and so we can understand that in a real context what
we're also going to do is quote what that meant if you were a skilled tradesman
that's the high level of salary. So that would have been 204 days wages for a
skilled tradesman at that time. John Tucker received 30 pounds that's the
equivalent in 2017 of 886 pounds 26 pence 92 days wages.
Muhammad Sharif received 14 pounds 421 pounds 34 in 2017 money and 43 days
wages at the time. Now John Abdullah who owned a shop and boarding house which
was the center of a lot of the damage received a hundred and seventy five
pounds. Now that's the equivalent of just over five thousand pounds and it was
531 days wages. Issa Muhammad received 12 pounds 348 pounds equivalent which is
the equivalent of 36 days wages. Ismail Muhammad received seven pounds 203
pounds 14 in 2017 and 21 days wages. Sayyid bin Sayyid received four pound
116 pounds 23 equivalent and 12 days wages. Fahra Muhammad received five
pound 145 pounds 29 equivalent and 15 days wages. Sali Abdullah received six
pound the equivalent of 174 pounds 35 18 days wages and Muhammad Hassan received
the equivalent 145 pounds 29 and 15 days wages. So although the events were
savage and caused some serious physical injury to the black merchant seaman the
treatment they received in court reflected the fact that they did not
start the riot. Also the compensation amounts were significant at that time so
despite the press consistently for most of June placing the blame for the Cardiff
riots on black people living in Cardiff that was not the conclusion reached by
the court and they received compensation for loss of belongings and damage to
property. It's interesting to note that even that these events occurred 20 years
before the start of World War one World War two and despite racist attacks
brutality by white mobs and overt threat to their families these black
people returned to the sea in World War two to assist Britain. In World War two
at least 645 Arab merchant seamen serving on the British Navy merchant
navy died. Of the 479 men who listed their last known address 242 sailed out
of Wales. 30 from Barry 12 from Swansea 10 from Newport 189 from Cardiff. Our
research shows that 330 men born in the Caribbean died serving on the UK merchant
navy in World War two. 56 of those listed their last known address as Wales. Three
from Newport 11 from Barry and 42 from Cardiff. These men left at least 35 wives
behind in Wales. Also there were sisters daughters brothers and mothers listed in
next of kin. Now this shows that the riots racism attacks failure of
government unions and others to support men none of this changed their
commitment to settling in Wales and becoming black citizens in an often
unfriendly environment. This is really important because for those of us who
are black but of mixed race third generation nowadays and fourth and fifth
generation the statement of intent made by those people during and after the
1919 race riots after having been involved in World War one and after a
tremendous loss of life in World War one within their community that statement
is why we're citizens of Wales today. Now in chapters 17 to 20 will show the
brutality of the environment in the United States an environment that also
had race riots in 1919 an environment ruled by Britain's closest allies.